Fantastic.
Um, welcome. It's great to see you all there.
Thank you for, um, joining us today.
Uh, we've got a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes set aside for your oral submission.
Uh, and welcome to use all of that time.
We'll leave some time for questions.
So, uh, over to you and lovely to see your, um,
smiling faces on the screen.
Thank you. Oh, you're,
you're muted though at the moment is the only thing.
Perfect. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you for that. Lovely welcome.
Yes, we were gonna travel in convoy
to Wellington from the Hawkes Bay, um,
but then thought we would take up this offer
and have more of our, uh, support crew,
um, with our message.
So thank you for the opportunity.
Um, so yeah,
we are here representing the Hawke's Bay Dragon
Boat, um, club.
Um, and, but we also speak
for our Dragon boating fan.
Now, throughout the country, there's over 30 clubs and two
and a half thousand paddlers, um, in New Zealand.
Um, compete or participate in Dragon boning.
Um, we might be a, a small club out in the, the sticks,
but we've got a very loud voice, um, when it comes
to things like this that affect our ability to, um,
you know, participate to grow our, our club
and to, um, be a part of our, or give back to our community.
So for us to do that, um, we're absolutely reliant on,
uh, community funding
and especially the gambling trust funding, um, you know,
to support what we do.
But also because we are the only club in Hawkes Bay, we had
to travel out of the region to compete,
to participate, and to qualify.
Um, and so to do that,
obviously there's a cost,
and on average it's about eight
to $10,000 every time we attend over gata.
That is, has been, uh, funded
through the gambling trusts in the, you know, up to date
and hopefully into the future.
Um, we also have a challenge here with, um,
I guess local government with the sinking LID policy.
So we're getting squeezed in both directions around, um,
the gambling side of things, um, and the closing down
or the sinking lid on, uh, venues that are offering that.
Um, it's very contestable.
So we, um, it's very challenging.
We apply for our funding, um, ahead of our events.
Um, obviously we can't do it retrospectively,
and so we are on this sort of, um, tenuous, um,
um, string if you like,
not sure whether we're gonna get the funding to, um,
attend our events if we don't.
Uh, and often we, we do find already
that we can be unsuccessful because of Lacker funds.
Um, and this is only gonna further compound
and put the, uh, the squeeze on us,
but that if we didn't get funding for an event, um,
it would cost our members five to $600 each
to attend an event, and that's just not possible at all.
Um, so just a little bit about Dragon boating.
It, it's more than a sport, it's a lifeline in so many ways.
Um, so it, um, it's for all ages above 12,
and we have members, um, quite a few members, quite a few
of us actually in that older age bracket,
but it's great for social, uh, connection, uh,
physical fitness, mental health.
Um, we also have a breast cancer survivor crew,
and there are a number of those
crews throughout New Zealand.
Um, so it's an absolutely vital,
and it's proven to benefit the health benefits of that crew.
So for us to train
and compete as a breast cancer team around the country,
we need the funding to support us to do that.
Um, it's proven to be a powerful tool for mental health,
physical rehabilitation and social inclusion, as I said.
And we are, as I said, in a growth phase.
We've only been operating five to six years, um,
and looking to buy more boats, more equipment,
and all of that's a cost of boats, $15,000, you know,
our life jackets, uh, paddles, all of
that equipment for water safety.
We do water safety training.
Um, we have training of our crews.
So we offer a number of, um, benefits to our community,
not just, um, us as a team or as a crew
or as a club, um, with open days, um,
and engaging with our community.
There's only so much that a sausage sizzle
or a quiz night will go towards.
Um, and that usually covers some of our overheads,
like insurance and container high for our equipment
and things like that, but it goes nowhere
to getting us equipment, um,
or getting us to the competitions if we missed on,
you know, if this, uh, went ahead
and there was no mandated minimum of a 40% return back
to community, um, for us that would price our
participation out of the market.
I just, there is no other, you know, avenue,
um, for us to do that.
Sorry. Um, so our ability to compete, to grow, to engage
with our community would be, uh, severely disadvantaged
and you can't grow, um, a sport
or a team or a, um,
a community service on barren land.
So, uh, it, it, it's a vital lifeline for us.
Um, and I also think that, you know,
it's people at gamble in our local venues.
We, uh, support those local venues with our, um,
our meetings, our quiz nights.
So it's a two way, uh,
support mechanism within our community.
Um, we already feel the impact
of the reduced class four funding with the policies.
As I said, especially one of our local governments is, uh,
clamping down on that quite hard.
Um, and also with, uh, you know, some online gambling
that was sort of came on the back end of, uh,
COVID and things like that.
So that ripple effect is still being felt.
Um, there is, with the increased contestability,
there's clubs like ours and many other sporting clubs
or, um, community, um, organizations
that are, are missing out.
It's, it's crazy to put us all in,
fighting against each other for, um, every little dollar
that we can to survive.
Um, so, um, we've raised, um,
our own membership fees.
We charge our members, um, a fee for their uniforms.
Um, we ask members to self-fund their meals
and stuff when we travel, so we don't totally rely on,
um, the grant funding.
But the grant funding is, as I said, our lifeline to get
to events, um, to participate, um, and to build our club
and buy our equipment, um, so that we can do our,
what we love and Dragon boat.
Um, yeah,
so the bottom line is we would not be able to travel.
We would not be able to compete,
and as I said, probably over 80% of our club members
would not be able to, um, self-fund this,
the participation in the sport.
Um, so essentially we're on this growth trajectory.
It's very exciting. We've got, um, a very committed crew.
We have, um, a coach that travels
through from Wellington at his own expense every
week, uh, to train us.
So he really believes in us and what we are doing.
Um, but all of that would diminish without us being able
to access the gambling trust funding.
Um, so I guess in
looking at the broader picture,
which I'm sure this message is coming through loud
and clear with the committee anyway, um,
but we'll just add our voice to it anyway.
Um, class four gambling returns approximately 300 million
annually to over 11,000 community groups.
Um, and, you know, and sporting groups
and, um, the online casinos currently return less than 2%
of profits to communities if the bill proceeds
without safeguards.
There are millions
of dollars we strip from our regional communities.
Um, and you know,
I I just think the regional regions are struggling
anyway in so many ways.
Um, and um, this would just be another,
uh, death nail to that.
Um, so yeah, we are just asking that we're not asking
for charity, but we are asking for fairness.
And that, um, a recognition
that sports like dragon boating saves lives,
builds resilience and connects communities.
And without the funding, we cannot grow.
We cannot compete and we cannot serve our communities.
The government must regulate responsibly
and ensure gambling profits continue
to strengthen the regions who need them most.
So hopefully that is going to be the outcome
where we get there, where,
Thank you. I don't
have a question, but
what an incredible group you are.
It's such an inspiring story.
I had no idea that, um, that this happened in New Zealand,
and I just think it's incredible.
So thank you, um, for the work that you do,
and you know, I wish you every success
and also for your time joining us.
I don't check, I think we're almost outta time
just checked with my colleagues.
I think you gave a very comprehensive submission.
So thank you all and I see to you all in the back row there.
Thank you for joining us, uh, today.
Thanks so much
And best of luck, um, for your next, um, uh,
competition. See you. Okay.
Thank you So much. Fantastic.
So, American football. Yes.
We now have the Papa Toy Toy Wildcats American Football Club
be joining us by Zoom.
Oh, Kiara, everybody. Kiara, how are you?
I'm good, thank you. And I'm a party of one very tough act
to follow after the Dragon boat girlies.
Yeah, that was, um, that I have to say,
we don't usually have that many submitters at once, so, uh,
having one or two people is, is, is the norm.
So please don't feel, um,
No, that's okay. My
home office is only small.
I couldn't fit my whole contingent in here today.
Um, but thank you for having me.
I think one of the aspects of my conversation that Sean,
through the Dragon boat Girlies, was that community groups
and sports groups in New Zealand just contribute to happier
and healthier lives.
Um, it was all teeth from those girls
and they mentioned that they represented anybody from 12
to whatever age you become.
And in American football, that's exactly what we do.
Um, so I will just start, I have a little, uh, bit
of a speech prepared that was prepared by my club committee.
Um, so Koto
and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Sise Henry,
and I am here on behalf
of the Papa Toi Toi Wildcats American Football Club in
Auckland, um, as well
as our peers across the American football community.
Collectively, there are 21 American football clubs
nationwide, and we are here regarding the OCG,
the online casino gambling Bill
and I, I wanna be clear from the outset
that we asked the committee
to include a community benefit clause in this bill
to ensure gambling profits are reinvested back into
New Zealand communities so we can all be happy and healthy.
So the Pepper Toi Wildcats, we are proud
to be celebrating our 39th year across our community
and from local clubs right through to our national body.
Actually, we're heavily reliant on community funding
to survive for us
and many other sports in our tero community.
Funding, um, is the difference
between a healthy New Zealander
and an unhealthy one, a good citizen and a disengaged one.
And in some cases it could be the difference
between life and death.
Now, community grant funding
and gaming trust funding, we use this funding
to reduce the cost of participation in our sport.
Without it, many
of our young people would simply just not be able
to play American football.
If you're familiar, it's like the NFL.
We have shoulders and pads.
Um, so we demand specialized, important, imported equipment
to safely field one athlete.
And this could cost us from 800
to a thousand New Zealand dollars per athlete.
And they are only manufactured in the USA
now for a lot of our families already under financial
pressure, that cost is impossible without, uh, the support
of community funding.
So it makes it possible for them to pass a participate.
Amir American Football is the sport.
It is unique because we are the most
inclusive sport in the world.
There is a role for every body type with a big
or small, tall or short, and it's a true team sport.
So success requires every single player on the grid iron
to do their role, and nobody is left out.
It is also a pathway sport
so our athletes can access higher education through the,
through US scholarships,
creating life-changing opportunities, not just
for individuals, but for families and generations to come.
Just this year, our club alone had 11 athletes represent
New Zealand, um, raising their profile
for international opportunities
and lifting the pride of their AU
and committees, especially in a time where it's been winter,
it's been cold, there's not too much happening in school.
There's been something that a family can look forward to.
Um, so Papa Toy Toy, if you're not familiar,
we are located in South Auckland.
Um, we are an area of hyper deprivation, low income,
high obesity rates,
and high levels of suicide and depression.
What our club and other clubs like it do is we provide a
safe space where people can thrive.
Um, for example, one young man joined us
and he was weighing over a hundred kgs
and battling depression.
With the support of his teammates, he lost 30 kgs.
He's gained a whole bunch of confidence.
He's now, um, employed and he's mentoring others.
We've seen women overcome postnatal depression,
and we've seen young people escape bullying
by finding belonging in a team.
Uh, these short stories, they're not isolated stories.
They're a daily reality of what our
what community sport achieves when supported.
Um, American football, we may not be the largest sport,
but we are one of the most diverse and inclusive.
So 4,500 odd play across New Zealand
of this about 50%, uh, Maori and Pacifica.
So, uh, specifically 2,144 Pacifica
700 to 64 Maori.
And our youngest players,
just like the dragging boating girls are 10 to 12
and they can play
until they decide they don't want to play anymore.
We do have intergenerational participation with
granddad's sons, sons, or sons and daughters.
Um, this inclusivity is essential to who we are,
but it also means we represent communities
who are disproportionately affected by gambling harm,
which makes the return of gambling profits,
her community funding not just desirable, but necessary.
Um, the OCG bill we agree is an important step, but,
and this it includes a community benefit clause.
Gambling profits will flow offshore and into private hands
and not return to the communities
who bear the greatest social costs.
Um, a community benefit clause would guarantee profits are
reinvested locally supporting grassroots sports,
social services, and community organizations.
Again, healthy, happy New Zealanders, uh, maintain fairness,
ensuring that very,
ensuring the very communities most impacted
by gambling harm also see the greatest benefit from returns.
And it protects sports likes
where survival depends on contestable funding.
Without the safeguard, our communities kind
of realistically we lose twice, once through the harm caused
by gambling and then again when the profits are taken away
from local reinvestment.
Um, and then in closing, community funding, it's not
optional for us, it's essential.
It keeps our young people active, safe
included, and connected.
It creates pathways to higher education
and it's an opportunity to save lives.
On behalf of the Papa to Wildcats
and our peer clubs, the 21 other American football clubs
across, we strongly urge you
to please include a community benefit clause in the online
casino gambling bill,
because when gambling profits fail to return
to the communities who bear the social cost,
the harm is doubled. Thank you.
Thank you, Kira.
Thank you so much for your, um, submission.
That was really interesting.
I had no idea that there was
so much miracle football happening in New Zealand.
And I just had a quick question
'cause we are almost out of time.
Yes. Do you, um, some of the, uh, students
that you talked about that managed
to get these kinda scholarships to go over, um,
north America, do they end up staying and,
and playing for, for periods of time
or is it, um, that, do they come back to New Zealand?
What's the kind of pathway for that
for the sport once they reach that level?
I think it's a little bit 50 50 in
how successful you are when you are there.
Some young men, they build, they become, they perform
so well that they offered additional opportunities
beyond high school, beyond college.
Sometimes they go professional or semi-pro
and for others they come back and mentor youth
and put them on pathways for those opportunities as well.
And while the pathway is important, I don't think it's
so much the pathway, I think it's the skills, um,
and the characteristics of being in a team environment
and, um, striving to achieve a goal
that's extremely important in that context as well.
That's super impressive. Thank you so much.
We'll just check with colleagues. No further questions.
Thank you so much for joining us today
and best of luck with the amazing work that you,
that you're doing in your community. Thank
You all.
Thank you. We've got our next, uh, submitter here,
the Victoria Theater Trust, and we've got Margo.
Yes. Can you hear me okay?
Yes, we can. We can hear and see you, so thank you. Oh,
Good. Okay. Thank
You for joining us. We've
got, um, 10 minutes for your, um,
submission. Yes. Over to you.
I'm sure I won't take that long.
Thank you for having me today.
Um, so you've heard a lot of sport from sporting groups.
Well, we are an historic cinema.
We, uh, the Victoria Theater
and Davenport is the oldest purpose-built cinema
in the Southern Hemisphere.
And it was reopened, uh, 15 years ago by a community effort.
Uh, and uh,
'cause we love our old buildings in Davenport,
so it's now open seven days a week.
It's 112 years old.
It's a very lovely and interesting place.
Now we do really, we get income from our tickets,
but we are a very old building and we want restore it
and we have to keep, uh, up to date
with all the latest equipment.
So we have to work really hard to get funding.
We get funding, um, from the big lotteries
and, uh, foundation North.
But we have to say that the funding
that we get from Pub charities, NZCT,
blue Sky over the last 12 years is mounted to about $50,000.
So that's really important to us.
It's covered all sorts of things like seats, projectors,
contributing to these really major costs that we have.
And by the way, the VI is the,
is got the highest protection in the country, um, historic,
uh, places as well as on the Auckland Council a list.
So, um, yeah, we work really hard.
We're just a little small group, a trustees group,
so we are really concerned that obviously if we,
if this income, if this bill is passed, it's going
to affect our income in a way
because, um, there's gonna be less money coming
to the pub charities and these people who, that we rely on
because there's gonna be more competition.
I think everyone has said that probably,
and that seems to be an obvious thing that'll happen.
So that's the sort of selfish thing that we are looking at.
We are looking at a reduction in, in our grants that we get.
I think you also have to realize
that at the moment in this country, a lot
of organizations are struggling with grants,
certainly in Auckland because the council doesn't give
grants as much as they used to.
That's really dropped significantly.
And I know of organizations, small arts organizations
that are facing, uh,
well being finished actually just closing down
because the funding is so hard to get now.
So this will just be another, um, nail in the coffin, uh,
because all of us, as you've heard all day,
have really relied, uh, come to rely on this.
But I think we're also concerned, well, I personally am and,
and we've discussed it as a board, why do we need this?
Why do we need to increase gambling? That's a real worry.
I think there's always been a moral dilemma
in taking money from pub chair from, um,
the pokey machines already.
There's a moral dilemma there
because we know that gambling does cause harm,
there's no doubt about that.
So this will increase harm.
And I can't see actually that things,
I've been reading the bill and it says we will, um,
that we're very, uh, there was something
that it says there about well take all reasonable steps
to ensure that under eighteens can't, uh,
take part in online gambling,
take all reasonable steps is incredibly weak.
Uh, I don't know if you,
I don't know enough about the legislation
to know whether this is true that,
but it seems very, very hard to manage gamblers
and problem gamblers and young gamblers.
So this could increase the harm in New Zealand.
Um, so I, I think that that it, it's just seems to be, um,
a terrible thing to increase harm.
Uh, so that's, that's a real, real problem for a lot of us.
Uh, it's bad enough that we accept the money from, um, from,
from the pokey, uh, bars and stuff,
but at least you've gotta think
that people go out into an organ, they go out to a pub or a,
or a pokey machine bar and they mix with other people.
Online gamblers are just gonna be sitting at home
and they can sit there for 24 hours a day.
So that's a real worry.
They don't even have a social connection.
They don't have anyone in that room saying,
you've been here a long mate, a long time mate,
once you get home, you know, there's not that sort of, um,
just social connection.
They're gonna be sitting in their homes.
Uh, so I we are absolutely opposed to this bill completely.
I don't, I don't want more money from them.
I just think, just don't have it.
Just, just save our people. Let's not do this.
Um, I could go on,
but I think you've heard a lot from a lot of people.
Um, but I just, just, it's nice to say
that actually it's not all about sporting groups,
that there's some other places like ours, historic, um,
little organizations that rely on this funding,
but we don't want any more blood money coming in from
gambling at all than what we already get.
So thank you for listening to me today.
Thank you so much, Mario. I really appreciate that.
And, and, um, it's a really good point that you make around,
uh, the diversity of where some of this funding goes to.
And we, we've, um, invited submitters.
We've tried to have a, uh, a diversity of,
of people providing their view.
So your perspective, uh, running the,
or being involved in the theater
and in Davenport is really appreciated.
So thank you so much. Thank you. Thank you.
All right. Our next, um,
submitters are the Canterbury Alpine Skating
Club, and they're joining us by Zoom.
I think we've got Logan.
So, uh, Logan, if, if you can, uh, hear me, uh,
if you can just accept the request to join as a panelist
and then we'll be able to hear and see you
And issues.
We do have the Lakehouse Arts.
Yeah. Um, Okay
Too. Okay. Uh,
Logan, we're just gonna see if we can, um,
sort out these technical issues.
So we'll move on to the lake house arts, uh,
and I think we've got Gray joining us.
Welcome
Gilda. Gilda,
thanks for joining us a little bit early.
Uh, we've got a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes set aside
for your oral submission today.
Uh, so you're welcome to use all of that time.
We'll leave a bit of time for discussion at the end.
Over to you.
And thank you for the opportunity to appear.
In my submission, I would like to make a case for amendment
of the online casino gambling bill in consideration
of the regulated return
of online gambling profits to communities.
I'm speaking on behalf of Lakehouse Trust, which governs DE
to Lakehouse Arts,
a heritage community arts center serving the North Shore in
Auckland for over 25 years.
And the top, top five provider of arts
and culture programs in the Auckland region.
We are one of a dozen such community arts providers on the
North Shore alone at Lakehouse Arts.
We welcome more than 15,000 visitors each year
through exhibitions, art classes, cultural festivals,
and free community events.
Community funding supports us to deliver activities
that are free, inclusive
and provide many benefits to our communities.
Activities including over 50 community art exhibitions
and performances per annum, supporting all art genres
and accessible by all ages and cultures.
Yearly. Over 600 unique art programs on site
and through outreach to the wider community,
a dozen accessible studios hireable at community rates,
supporting wider community activities
and additional permanent artist studios
for over 30 local artists.
Over 2000 affordable enrollments
with additional scholarships and outreach programs in arts
and culture classes free
to access Special events we provide are things like our
Maki holiday markets appreciated by thousands
that provide an economic boost
for small creative businesses.
Our community open day when we open every studio
and all the galleries providing free workshops, exhibitions
and performances, creating direct free access for people
to arts, breaking down barriers to participation,
and many, many more.
These activities are in part made possible
by the regulated return of gaming.
Machine profits to communities through contestable funding.
They generate pride, unity, and wellbeing.
They are the net positive
that justifies gambling's social license.
The support from that funding
for arts centers like Lakehouse Arts
and our North Shore partners ranges from 2.5% up
to 25% or more of overall revenue per annum.
Income helps fund individual projects,
subsidized community activities, essential facilities,
upkeep and maintenance.
And Lakehouse is just one example across roa, anywhere up
to $300 million a year in gaming.
Machine returns, sustained sports clubs, marae committees,
cultural festivals, and community centers.
If online gambling takes player spend away without giving
back, we will see machines removed.
As venues become unsustainable.
A permanent decline in community grants
and thousands of programs, festivals,
and scholarships across the country cut back
or entirely lost.
The long-term outcome is diminished society, fewer places
where people gather, learn, and celebrate together.
If that funding support from gaming machines diminishes.
The impacts for us are immediate.
Our scholarships employ professional art teachers
who mentor children over years.
Without continued funding support,
these scholarships disappear and so do teaching hours.
Artists lose income and children lose opportunity.
Every free event we run requires staff coordinators
and also maintenance and upkeep.
A reduction in grants means fewer shifts, less employment
and scaling back of events.
Keeping our facilities well kept in The safest,
most accessible condition would be under threat,
driving up costs of services to support maintenance
and reducing access to those who need it the most.
And most importantly, families who cannot afford
to pay will be shut out of opportunities
that enrich their lives.
Leaving the arts as a privilege for the few not a right
for all members of parliament,
this bill will be your legacy
if passed in its current form at risks being remembered
as the legislation that cut off the lifeblood
of grassroots culture, sport
and community across New Zealand for generations to come,
people will look back
and ask, why was the principle of community return
abandoned when gambling moved on online?
However, this is also an opportunity
to support community wellbeing
and legislative bill that supports more
and better social license
and benefit that supports community wellbeing
and provides avenues for community prosperity.
In closing, I urge you to amend this bill in consideration
of regulated return
of online gambling profits two communities.
I urge you to consider the human
and cultural cost at Lakehouse Arts and all our arts culture
and community centers, sports clubs,
and recreational groups across, we see daily joy learning
and connection that community funding makes possible.
Nu I welcome your questions kilda,
Kda kilda gray. Thank
you so much for your submission.
Um, I just had a question
around the funding climate at the moment.
Uh, so you're obviously doing some incredible work there in
the North Shore, uh, working with artists
and with the community and also with with children.
Do you, have you found that it's more difficult in recent
years or what,
how have you found the funding environment in terms
of being able to, uh, obtain funding to continue your work?
I think it's very fair to say that there is more
and more pressure on existing contestable funds
and those funds are reducing in the amounts
that they can give round on round.
Thank you. Just check with my colleagues.
No further questions. Uh, thank you
so much for joining us today.
We'll let you get back to your important, uh, in Auckland
and, uh, thank you very much
for your written submission
and for your oral submission. Sure.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Just fantastic. We've got Logan there now.
Welcome, Logan, glad you're able to get you on board.
I think we've got you on mute now still.
Um, apologies for the technical problems there,
but we do have a copy of your written submission
and we've got 10 minutes set aside
for your oral submission today.
So over, over to you, Logan. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Apologies
for the technical issues there.
I'd just like to, uh, echo the, the recent, uh,
panelists views as well in terms of, uh, providing a means
to give back to the community any legislation in the
online gambling space.
Uh, we feel this is a very important aspect of, uh,
any gambling activity.
Uh, not to say that it is, uh, activity that we support,
but we do feel it necessary to give back
to the community when such things are occurring.
Um, our club, the Canterbury Alpine Ice Skating Club has
been an incorporated society since 1984, uh, one year
before I was born, in fact,
and I've only joined the club recently to help with funding
and have noticed, uh, the immense pressure of local
sporting clubs, including ours and,
and many others to, to get funding
and to pay for their operating and capital costs.
And across the board.
Um, our costs are quite horrendous in terms of, of
what we need to run as a club each year to, to pay
for a substantial amount of, um, ice time on the ice rink.
And this is why we need these sorts of funds
and able to continue our, our sport.
Um, it used to be a much more popular sport,
like a lot of others around the country.
Um, numbers have dwindled, uh, costs are excessive and,
and people are shutting the doors.
Um, and we're starting to find it's extremely challenging
to secure funds through the, the normal means.
And we're quite, um, uh, what would be the word,
a little bit scared of the future, um, of people sort
of drop off from the, the current, uh,
funding methods in terms of
recouping from the charities that currently exist.
Um, again, not to say that we support gambling
as an activity, but, but we feel
that if you going legislate online gambling,
that does need consideration
and we'd highly appreciate that as considered.
Um, again, just echoing your, your previous parents' views,
uh, there is a lot of people struggling out there
and it would be great to, you know,
create a circular environment where that money comes back
to the community as much as possible.
And that's basically all I've got for you today.
Thank you so much, Logan.
Um, I just had a question around, um,
what you actually do do, so you just use the ice rinks
that are available? Is that the main Yeah, so,
So in Christchurch we have one ice rink available,
so obviously that's,
that's the one place we can train on the ice.
Um, and in order to do that, we have
to pay quite a substantial higher ridge fee to the rink.
Um, but it's not just that there's other things like sport,
um, the suits we wear
or, um, ke our protection, uh, embedded within them.
So they're quite expensive, um, to, to do the sport well.
Most of the, um, guys at the top have to head offshore.
So there's, there's a bit of funding required
for those activities to compete on the world stage and,
and to really, uh, make something of the sport.
And if these people want to get into the Olympics
and the like, then, then there is quite a cost with that.
So yeah, just the ice time is the main thing just
to keep the club running, but there's all the, um,
other things on top of that.
Thank you. Thank you very much
for that. I'll just check if,
Yeah, I'm really interested.
Sorry, I I'm really interested to know what kind of events,
uh, our athletes actually participate in from New Zealand
because I, I don't think I've actually really heard much
about skating in New Zealand.
Yes, like I said, it is a bit of a dwelling sport.
Back in, uh, probably 20 years ago, it was much more popular
once the actually became an Olympic sport.
It was only in recent times.
Um, so locally we have our own national championships,
which, um, skaters from the local clubs, IE Auckland,
Queenstown, Dunedin,
unfortunately Dunedin have recently stopped
because of, um, the inability to,
to keep operating 'cause of funding.
Um, so then offshore we, they, they generally go
to Australia to start off with
where they compete against others in Melbourne mostly.
And then the Youth Olympics
or the world champs, um, Korea, Canada,
and other places where, um,
speed skating is far more popular. So
Yeah, so only speed skating
Just speed skating for us, but I'm sure the figure skating
and maybe even the hockey clubs would've, uh, similar views
and hopefully we'll be presenting at some point.
Okay. Thank You so much.
We, we are learning a lot about, um,
our New Zealand supporting community of,
so we really appreciate your contribution to that Logan.
And, and thanks for all the work that you do and,
and for sharing your views today. Thank
You very much.
Good bye. Thank you. Just check with the committee now.
We our, yeah. Fantastic.
Um, we are running a little bit early today, so would like
to, uh, welcome 8 8 8 New Zealand, is that correct?
Or 880?
Apologies if I, uh, got that wrong. Oh, apologies.
There are also some presenters. There are three
Present presenters online.
They're in New York, London and Perth, Australia
Itself. Oh, fantastic. Excellent.
Hence I'm the collective guy to be here. Yeah,
Please. Um, take
a seat
and we'll just see if we can get all
of the rest of the people.
Yeah, two more. Are there two more? Just coming. Okay.
We're running a bit ahead of time, so no rush.
Think it's 2:00 AM or something in New York.
Well, we really appreciate there are,
There are a few, uh, comedy's context.
Yeah, we really appreciate the effort that we've gone to.
So, um, we've, we've done 10 minutes for your submission.
Um, we'll leave it to you to maybe introduce, uh,
your colleagues and, and utilize the, the 10 minutes.
We've got your comprehensive written submission as well.
So over to you. Thank you. Perfect.
Um, when would, like, ahead now? Yep. Okay.
Absolutely. Um, my name's Lonnie Bossi.
Um, I'm a CEO of the 8 8 8 New Zealand Venture.
Um, and have 15 years experience as a CEO
and C-Suite member joining us remotely.
Um, we have from Perth, Australia, Sasha Grist,
she's our head of corporate and, uh, commercial.
We also are lucky enough
to have two experienced international executives.
Um, in London we have I, pna, who's the former CEO
of 8 8 8 holdings. Apologies
For the very late timing for you.
Oh, it's even worse, I think for New York,
if I'm not right or not, who's got worst?
London has the worst time. I think it's like two after two
In the morning. Yep. And in
New York we've got Y Sherman,
who's the former senior vice president and 8 8 8 holdings.
That's not too bad. Nice to see
you all. Thank you for joining
Us. We as a team
represent still, still Water Limited, um,
which the New Zealand dedicated, uh, venture.
And what we are using is the trusted 8 8 8 brand partnering
with Playtech as a platform provider,
which are globally recognized and new to New Zealand,
but they're gonna be delivering the functionality
and the player protection processes for us.
Uh, thanks again for the opportunity to present.
Um, we are here to raise with you
what we believe are three critical issues, um, with respect
to the bill, which is licensing enforcement and ization.
What I'll start with is
licensing, which is the heart of the bill.
Uh, if, if we get this right, then the rest
of the regime will work perfectly.
If we get it wrong, the bill may well fail
to achieve the purpose that you've got.
Um, so we think there's two cre critical licensing issues.
First is competition.
So we understand there's three, every operator has a chance
of participating in the, in the, in 15 licenses
and can hold up to three licenses.
Essentially, that says five companies
could dominate the market.
Um, and what that will lead to will be less innovation,
weaker harm minimization processes,
and realistically, a lot
of customers remaining in the black market
because there's a lack of real choice with,
with five, with five companies.
So we recommend the 15 licenses,
however, with a, a cap of one per operator
and one brand per license to allow
more suitable operators into the market.
Um, incentivize investment in those safer gaming tools
and make sure you've got the framework we're looking for.
Um, offering more variety
and keeping plays in a regulated system, which we'll get
to at a later point on channelization.
Second issue is certainty.
The, the bill grants three years upfront,
then a further five year renewal
process, and that's where it ends.
So we think that sends the wrong incentives to the market.
Um, it, it provides no certainty beyond the eight years,
and in essence, it'll less likely
that the operators will invest in the New Zealand specific
technology that will be required,
put the resources into harm minimization systems, um,
and create jobs and skills locally.
Um, it'll attract short term profit takers is the way
that typically operates
and the, rather than the longer term investors you want in a
robust framework that, that the government really desires.
So two recommendations in essence, go to this,
keep the three and five years, no problem there.
Allow further renewals subject
to appropriate compliance checks.
Secondly, publish a required criteria, so it's very obvious
to operators and investors what that criteria is
to remain compliant.
Um, and
and what that does is plan allows for planning
of certainty in essence, that will put New Zealand
as an international best practice framework,
allowing that process to occur.
And it'll also tie in the compliance
and long-term investment you're looking for.
When it comes to enforcement,
the current bill doesn't really give the opera, uh,
the regulator enough powers to stop bad offshore operators.
If unlicensed operators can still freely access the
New Zealand market, then licensed operators may well
undervalue the, the license itself.
Um, players will keep using those unsafe, um, jurisdictions
and, and untaxed black markets
and undermine the purpose of the legislation.
Lack of effective enforcement.
These bad operators will still be visible in the market.
They'll still advertise illegal,
they'll still access payments from New Zealand players
and they'll still provide inducements
and risky, um, products
that the license operators won't be able to provide.
Um, so in that sense, we'll re we recommend
that the Secretary of Internal Affairs, um, require service
and payment providers to block access to transactions, uh,
with unlicensed sites and work with overseas regulators
and gain providers,
which is not uncommon in the marketplace.
In fact, Denmark and Ontario do this very well.
Also, um, look at an annual enforcement report.
They'll give operators a, a strong piece of transparency,
trust, and confidence in the regime by showing
what the government is doing about black market operates.
I think that's, there's, that's a critical element.
Just trust is what the customer
wants, it's what the operators want.
Um, and empower the regulator to issue cease
and desist orders to rogue operators,
um, and their shareholders.
So the people that are financially benefiting out of it,
it's proven successful in New York, um,
in California, um, and Ontario.
I don't believe it'll be any different yet.
Um, finally, I'll,
I'll just a quick touch on channeling players
towards regulated market.
Um, you want to make a,
or we want to have a much safer gambling experience
and effective harm minimization tools to achieve.
These players have to trust these licensed operators.
They must have visibility on them,
and the government messaging in support
of this becomes really important as well.
Uh, if the balance is right,
then the stronger channelization will end up having more
customers using those player protection tools.
It'll also should enhance the visibility of
who the regulator and licensed operators are.
Fewer people will be harmed, in essence, better tax revenue
that you can reinvest not only in harm minimization tools,
but also the community, um, programs
that no doubt you've had plenty of, um, submissions on.
In terms of advertising, again,
we were talking about bad actors earlier.
Irresponsible marketing practices have to be prohibited.
Miners have to be protected.
Um, we all agree with that,
but at the same time, allow licensed operators
to promote those brands
that are operating within the framework.
Um, the promotions, the products, the safer gaming tools
that support the very
legislation we're looking at here today.
Um, in essence that needs transparency
and strong gambler messages.
Summary just in concluding licensing enforcement
and advertising must work together
to channel the place successfully to our regulated markets.
One without the other, cannot deliver the objectives
that the government is, is looking for.
Thanks very much for your time and happy to answer questions
and and pass on to my colleagues.
Thank you so much. Uh,
and thanks for your submission and your suggestions.
I a couple of questions. So the first one was
around you've suggested, um, the use of blocking
in channeling Yes.
Um, as part of, uh, uh, part of the way of having a,
a successful regulatory regime.
We've heard from some other submitters today that
blocking can be a bit ineffective,
and I just wanted to give you opportunity to, to comment on
the, the use of blocking
and how effective whether
you've seen it be used effectively.
Okay. I'd like to bring in, um, your need on this.
Um, and both have got experience in this space you need,
I'll throw it to you to start with.
Sure. Thanks. Thanks again for your time.
Appreciate you hearing our submission.
Um, so, uh, blocking is, is um, sort of a generalistic term
that refers to preventing, um, uh, unregulated
or illegal operators to operate in a marketplace.
The operator doesn't do it alone.
There's an entire ecosystem that, uh, should put, uh,
protections in place.
But first and foremost, there has to be a clear guidance
by the regulator and the law authorities.
What is prohibited once that kicks in place,
then if people want still to circumvent, uh, they need
to be proactive about it, and then they're, um, raising
or running the risk of, um,
of dealing with the consequences.
It could be whether it's IP blocking
or payment blocking like it's done in other jurisdictions.
Um, most of the activities done on mobile, so you can put,
uh, geofencing measures in place.
Um, luckily New Zealand is an island, so it's a bit more,
um, I wouldn't say simple,
but it was a lot more complicated for us in the US
for instance, to block players from New Jersey from playing
in New York and vice versa.
So the technology is already there preventing players from
playing in a certain jurisdiction, uh,
or at least raising, uh, the point.
One of the critical point is this distinguishing
between licensed and unlicensed operators,
in which in many cases players don't, uh, distinguish
between those measures will help at least distinguish the
regulated operators from the non-regulated ones
and allow us as regulated, hopefully us as regulated, uh,
licensed operators to build a trust relationship
with the players and, and make that distinction.
I think it's as important as blocking the player at the end
of the day will decide where he wants to put
his attention and money.
But this is a very, this is a critical point in both
enforcement and operations.
Thank you. Um, I'll treat
with my colleagues, but I did have one other question.
You've mentioned a few other jurisdictions for us
to look at, but I think the one you highlighted in your
written submission was Ontario.
Is that the jurisdiction, which you would say has, you know,
for us to look at in terms of, um,
best practice in a regulated market for online gambling?
Uh, I would, so sorry, go
Ahead. No, no, go, go ahead.
Uni you're, you're the expert in this space.
Uh, I I think that Ontario is a good example of one way
of, of approaching this licensing regime.
Naturally every jurisdiction is, um, has its, um, unique
or distinguishing factors, but it's one of them.
I would look at a few, like two
or three key jurisdictions, um, including, uh,
the US including as being a single products, uh,
market in some cases Ontario, uh, and some of the European.
There's no shortage at this point.
Most of the online iGaming
and sports betting activity today is done on, on,
in regulated spaces.
So there's no shortage. I would try to get
as many similarities also on the market level.
Uh, Ontario being a province,
the largest province in in Canada.
Uh, other markets like Denmark and Holland, uh,
and the UK have their own similarities that would type
and, uh, and look into to, uh, adopt the relevant provisions
to the New Zealand market.
Okay. That's Melissa.
Thank you. Thank you for your submission.
I have a couple of questions. In your submission,
you actually talk about how the 15, uh, license, uh,
that it should really be one brand per operator.
How does that promote competition?
Because I know nothing about casinos or brands,
and what does the brand actually provide?
Does that actually mean that if everyone, uh, bids for one,
one brand and effectively go
and there's, you know,
no other brands actually in the market, does that actually
Go one, one brand per license?
So if there's 15 licenses, there's 15 brands in the market,
it's not just a single brand,
but I can certainly pass on to it. So
Explain what a brand actually mean
and, uh, in terms of, uh, casino
and how does that promote competition
It over to you?
Yeah, so, um, the, in general, the, the,
the intention here is to have 15, ideally
15 different companies
and 15 different brands operating in the market
to create enough, uh, competition, uh, enough, uh,
investment in, in product development
and safer gaming tools, uh, like in any other industry.
And, and online gaming is in different,
the more you limit competition, the more the less, uh,
choice consumers have
and the less the companies invest in, uh, everything
that's necessary to create a, a competitive, uh, product.
So, um, there were suggestions, uh, essentially to
allow, um, companies to acquire three licenses,
which would limit the amount
of companies operating in the market to five.
Uh, those five will, will probably operate at each one
of them three different brands, but with exactly the same
platform, exactly the same technology.
So, uh, obviously optimizing their investment in cost and,
and trying to capture, uh, a as much
as they can from the market.
Does that answer your question or would you like me to?
I think I'm more Confused. Okay.
So think, think about in this sense, 8 8, 8 New Zealand
is a site that's a brand.
Um, sky City will be a site that's a brand, um,
be 3, 6 5 would be a site and a brand.
I'm not, I'm just naming in general,
at 15 independent operators got 15 different companies
competing with their own version of a site, right?
In a world where you, that we stipulated with,
there's only five companies
because they can each have three brands.
You are saying 8, 8, 8 New Zealand, you get three brands,
let's call 'em eight, eight, eight New Zealand,
one, two, and three.
I thought you mean, which means we, I thought you under
that model, we, we, there's a whole lot
of dis distortionary effects in the market,
so it's less competition.
Okay, got it. Now I thought you actually meant brand
actually was like a game, like a Oh, right.
Trust me, there's about 10,000, so we'll get to that at a
Later. Alright, so I,
I'm interested in some of the concerns
that the communities have actually raised.
So two things. One, what I, what do you do, uh,
in your operations overseas, uh, that actually, um, shows
that you actually do enough to, for harm minimization
for problem gamblers?
That's one question. And the other one is, um, you, uh,
online, um, casinos, um, you know, the concerns
that were raised by, uh, submitters was
that you will cannibalize the take of the, uh, class four,
uh, pokies, uh, gambling, uh, who currently contribute 40%
of their take to community funding,
including sports and arts.
So, uh, what are your thoughts on those?
Um, you need, if you wanna have it Yeah, sure.
I can take the second part if you wanna.
Sure. Um, so as far as, uh, player protection tools,
I mean, um, online regulation has been, um,
around for almost 20 years.
So there's been an evolutionary process, um, where in,
in recent times or in, in earlier times it was voluntary,
uh, then it became mandatory.
But at, at the end of the day, these were tools that were,
um, developed to protect both the operators
and the players In that regards, uh, it's a host of tools
that mostly flag out anomalies in player behavior
and then take on all sorts of measures.
Um, in most cases, they simply either, uh,
reduce the player's exposure in some cases,
close it altogether, provide the players with means
to exclude themselves, take time out, uh, again,
each one of the platforms.
And that's the reason why we're putting forward
what is a well established international platform.
We wanted to make sure we have the best tools available
that can meet regulations, uh,
and in some cases we exceed regulations
because some of these protections are also,
we are also incentivized commercially.
Um, protecting players is not just, um, uh,
an imperative or a moral imperative.
That's the baseline of it.
It's also the, the right thing
to do operationally and commercially.
Um, and also this is a unique product where, uh,
you don't wanna remove friction from the entire
onboarding process.
You want players to be at the right age, you want
to know enough about them, that's key.
Uh, when they're onboarded in most jurisdiction, they need
to provide, the initial set of data is not the trivial,
uh, and that's a key.
You need the data in order to be able to cope with, uh,
all these, um, these, call it anomalies
or, uh, player behaviors that, uh, should be limited.
And I think one of the biggest elements
of regulation is player, uh, or operator accountability.
The operators must be accountable towards player protection.
The regulation must hold the highest standards,
and I think that's the one of the biggest investment we've
made over the past two decades.
We have whole teams and bespoke technological efforts
and tools aimed at first understanding, uh, problem gaming
and then coping with it either by the player
or by the operator to limit those, um, to, to a minimum.
Because at the end of the day, it's both bad business
and it's bad for the community all across.
And we all understand that gambling also has that,
um, element to it.
It's very important not to look away
and look at straight in the eyes and cope with it.
So that's around.
Okay, so I, I'm actually really interested to know
what specific things that you as a company have done
for people who are identified as problem gamblers.
In Australia, you have bit stop,
which is requirement in New Zealand,
we have multi venue exclusion, uh,
that Salvation Army actually runs,
but the, those are self-generated by people who,
who identify themselves as problem gamblers,
but as an operator who actually take people's money,
what do you do to actually prevent these kinds of harms?
So in case that which Is bad for your business as well,
Uh, that's, that's absolutely true.
So once a player is flagged
or there's a, a flag raised with the player behavior,
whether he, he, um, he gambles at a pace that is not, uh,
uh, abnormal or above his means, first of all,
we gather the information in some of the markets.
He needs to start providing us
with more data once he hits a certain deposit
or play limit needs to provide more data
so we understand he's playing within his means.
Another measure that in other, uh, territories
that the regulator
or the government itself creates a central player pool
where you have to check against
that player pool at all every time he logs in to make sure
that that player isn't excluded
or flagged as a problem gambler.
Uh, that's the case in, uh, in markets, uh, like the UK
or the us.
That requires the regulator though, to be responsible for
that, uh, database.
Otherwise the operator keeps that database
and constantly checks, uh, every time a player logs in,
whether he's flagged as that player.
But again, the point is, starts off with an actually knowing
that player as much,
that's what's KYC know your customer is all about.
It's not a one time effort. It's an ongoing effort.
So every time the player plays with us as an operator,
we constantly check against his history, his background,
to make sure that he's playing within his means at the pace
that he's usually playing at.
And if, if any deviation you reach out to the player,
our customer support representatives pick
up the phone to have a chat.
Are you okay? Jump in a
Minute.
Just jump in. I've worked in land-based,
the data collected online,
the tools available online are far in excess of anything
that you'll see at any of these venues
or any casino casinos that use cash.
So you've got lack of controls and cash under this.
You've got full account based, um, activities.
You've got a full E-C-C-E-C-D-D structure,
you've got full player information,
you've got full transactional data.
And we use a, we, we've got, there's a,
there's a tool within built within, um, Playtech
that uses AI to, to manage and understand player behaviors.
So establishing, um, if you want default limits
that sit on every account exists,
that capability exists on virtually every website
that should be approved by New Zealand.
That's, that's a mandatory,
and then the government has a, has an authority
that if they wanna choose and set a, a default limit.
And the only way that a player can move from those default
control limits is
by proactively providing additional information.
So the control's much greater.
In terms of your other question on community, um, supports
it already exists out there.
The market has been, has been, um, evaluated at somewhere
between 700, 700 million
and a billion New Zealand dollars Today.
The New Zealand government only sees 36 companies paying GST
by regulating and channeling customers to those sites.
You start to see what that dollar looks like.
There's no money transitioning from the local venue.
This is money that automatically currently today is going
to international operators that has no, no requirement
to look after the community.
By having a regulated market, you then have funds coming in
because a, you know, the revenue, they're paying tax,
they have a license that gives you a whole
series of enforcement measures.
You can require additional funding within that process
to support the community greater without even talking about
a dollar moving from community groups.
That's just channeling the existing market
that doesn't have controls
that you're asking international operators
moving that into the marketplace.
So I, I suspect the, the, um,
the leakage or the movement
of play from the local operations to online, I think
that's being overplayed
because I don't think there's a fair evaluation in
New Zealand of the scale of the market today.
Okay. Does that help you?
That's, I thank you. I think this is probably a discussion
we could, um, have for a long
And I'm, I'm happy to help you
and submit anything further required.
Thank you. Um, and can give you a
copy of, of the presentation.
Thank you so much and we really appreciate your
colleagues, um, joining online
and apologies for the time, um, uh, time difference as well.
So, uh, please enjoy the rest of your day or night.
We'll have your experience there,
but I appreciate you, um, coming in, in person
and we certainly will take up your invitation if we do have
further questions for you.
Thank you so much. Thank, thank you. Thanks, Kim. Thank you.
Thanks. Thank
You. Thanks guys.
It's our last matter of the day. Thank you everyone.
Thanks for the team.
You July a copy of what I spoke to
or we've, no, we've already got.